Jesus as the great teacher created opportunities to witness to others.
And of course, an excellent example of that is found in John chapter 4.
So if you turn with me please to John chapter 4,
let's analyze how Jesus was able to do in formal witnessing.
And we'll see what lessons we can learn from it.
So looking at John chapter 4 to get the background we see in verses 3 through 6,
he mentions that Jesus left Judea and he was going towards Galilee.
But he decided to go through Samaria and ended up in Psyca.
Looking at the study note, we notice that this was a journey that involved an ascent of some 3000 feet.
Now that's a very high elevation to climb up to.
In rough terms we could say it's like going up 300 floors or stories in a building.
Imagine how you would feel at the end of that.
So if Jesus and His apostles had made that journey that morning,
it's no wonder that in verse 6 it says that He was tired out.
He was sitting there and it mentions in verse 6 to it was the 6th hour or about midday.
So imagine the setting Jesus is in Samaria, he's tired and it's about midday.
Not the best circumstances for starting to witness.
So what's the first lesson we learned from this?
Jesus didn't wait for the perfect opportunity to inform a witness.
Now he used whatever opportunity came up and created opportunities.
So of course the woman comes along and notice in verse 7 how Jesus introduced or started this conversation.
He simply said, give me a drink.
He didn't dive into some deep spiritual discussion, but rather just started talking to the woman.
For what lesson do we learn from that?
You see if we're interested in witnessing to others informally,
perhaps all it takes is just greeting them, saying hello,
and of course if they're not even willing to start talking to us,
it's very hard to go much further.
So that's the first lesson.
How did the woman respond?
Well, we'll notice as we go through John chapter 4,
there were at least four potential problems that Jesus had to avoid as He continued this discussion.
The first of these problems is recorded in verse 9.
This straight away she says,
you're a Jew and I'm a Samaritan woman.
How come you're talking to me?
So she referred to his appearance, his background.
Well, in a similar way today, sometimes someone may take a look at us
and refer to our color or racial background or nationality,
and that could be a negative thing.
But what did Jesus say?
Well, He didn't respond and say, you know, I'm a nice person.
That's how come I'm willing to talk to you.
Now, He completely avoided that whole issue
and focused on the spiritual message that He wanted to convey to her.
So we notice that in verse 10,
He speaks of the free gift of God.
And He also mentions that this woman could get living water,
not just the water that she was interested in at that point.
Now, when we analyze how the conversation went,
we can see clearly that Jesus laid the foundation here at this point
for what He was going to say later.
You see, He started with water,
then He mentions God's gifts and living water,
and we'll see how He develops that little further as we go on.
Well, what happened at that point when He offered this living water?
Well, in verse 11, notice, she says, you don't even have a bucket.
So in other words, she was basically saying, I don't believe you.
The well is very deep.
The study note says maybe about 75 foot deep.
So this is a negative reaction on her part.
She wrote up by something else that was very controversial in Jesus' day.
She says, do you think you're better than our forefather Jacob?
Now, that was very controversial because the average Jew in those days
would have objected to that comment saying that she wasn't a relative of Jacob.
So here we have another two possible problems.
How did Jesus handle it?
Jesus focused back on the spiritual message.
As we mentioned, as recorded in verse 10, He started with water,
God's gift and living water, and then if we look at verse 14,
He speaks about drinking water that you would never get thirsty at all again,
and then He introduces the concept or thought of everlasting life.
Jesus had in his mind a plan of action or a little outline
how he could develop a certain theme.
And that was to do with water leading to everlasting life.
Well, how did the woman respond at that point?
Notice verse 15, she says, sir, give me this water.
Now, was she saying, please, I really want it?
Or was she perhaps a little cynical, maybe even a little psychastic?
Well, it's hard for us to tell.
It doesn't seem until later that she fully believed Jesus.
But whatever the case, it perhaps could, in a modern setting,
be like her saying, that sounds good, but it's too good to be true.
Did that stop Jesus? No.
Jesus then basically changes the direction of the conversation
and gives her an opportunity to show her honesty.
Jesus realized that she was coming at that time of the day
to avoid perhaps others seeing her. Why?
Well, in verse 16, Jesus says to recall your husband.
She says, I don't have a husband.
Very honest comment to a stranger.
Then Jesus said, you're right.
You had five husbands, and the man you're with now is not your husband.
You have said truthfully.
Well, now what do we learn from this?
You see, although Jesus knew that she was living in an immoral relationship,
still, that wasn't the focus.
He gave her an opportunity to express herself, and then what did he do?
He commended her.
So in a similar way, it's good for us to always try to find points that we can
commend the persons for, even if they say something that is totally opposite to what the Bible says.
We can at least thank them for expressing their viewpoint and being honest about it.
So as we continue on, we then see at this point,
the woman has really taken notice because she says, I see that you're a prophet.
But then the next problem, the fourth problem comes in.
What does she say? Well, we worship here, Mount Gerasim,
but you Jews, you say we should worship in Jerusalem.
So basically, a modern equivalent of saying, I have my own religion, and it's different from yours.
Well, how did Jesus deal with that potential problem?
But when we look at verse 21, it's interesting to see how he starts the answer
by saying, the hour is coming when, neither on this mountain,
nor in Jerusalem, will you worship the Father.
So basically, Jesus was just allowing her concern and saying, look, don't worry, in the future.
This is not going to be an issue, whether it's here or there.
And then he goes on to explain the important thing is to worship the Father with spirit and truth.
So what do we see from that?
Jesus tried to help her to see that what she perceived as being a problem really wasn't an issue at all.
It wasn't something they had to go through and explain all the details.
Of course, he did mention that salvation began with the Jews,
but then he showed her very clearly what she needed to do.
Now, why was that so important?
Well, if we turn later to the book of Acts chapter 8 and verse 14,
there's a very interesting study note there that tells us
that what Jesus did on this occasion in witnessing to this woman and then to various ones in her community
laid the basis for what Philip, the evangelizer, would later do when he moved to Samaria
and he would help many there to become Christians.
And ultimately, they became anointed Christians.
So Jesus' conversation here with this woman certainly was very, very successful.
So what have we learned from this discussion looking through John chapter 4?
First of all, Jesus didn't wait for the perfect opportunity.
He created that opportunity.
Secondly, he wasn't distracted or sidetracked by the various issues, some of them conversial,
that this woman raised, but he focused on a spiritual theme.
He had something in mind where he would use water to eventually describe everlasting life.
And then he commended her for her honest remarks and showed her what she needed to do.
What an excellent lesson this is for all of us as we try to witness to others.